Functions
def Statements with Parameters
Define, Call, Pass, Argument, Parameter
Return Values and return Statements
The None Value
Keyword Arguments and the print() Function
The Call Stack
Local and Global Scope
Local Variables Cannot Be Used in the Global Scope
Local Scopes Cannot Use Variables in Other Local Scopes
Global Variables Can Be Read from a Local Scope
Local and Global Variables with the Same Name
The global Statement
FUNCTIONS AS “BLACK BOXES”

Exception Handling
A Short Program: Zigzag
Summary
Functions are the primary way to compartmentalize your code into logical groups. Since the variables in functions exist in their own local scopes, the code in one function cannot directly affect the values of variables in other functions. This limits what code could be changing the values of your variables, which can be helpful when it comes to debugging your code.

Functions are a great tool to help you organize your code. You can think of them as black boxes: they have inputs in the form of parameters and outputs in the form of return values, and the code in them doesn’t affect variables in other functions.

In previous chapters, a single error could cause your programs to crash. In this chapter, you learned about try and except statements, which can run code when an error has been detected. This can make your programs more resilient to common error cases.

Practice Questions
1. Why are functions advantageous to have in your programs?

2. When does the code in a function execute: when the function is defined or when the function is called?

3. What statement creates a function?

4. What is the difference between a function and a function call?

5. How many global scopes are there in a Python program? How many local scopes?

6. What happens to variables in a local scope when the function call returns?

7. What is a return value? Can a return value be part of an expression?

8. If a function does not have a return statement, what is the return value of a call to that function?

9. How can you force a variable in a function to refer to the global variable?

10. What is the data type of None?

11. What does the import areallyourpetsnamederic statement do?

12. If you had a function named bacon() in a module named spam, how would you call it after importing spam?

13. How can you prevent a program from crashing when it gets an error?

14. What goes in the try clause? What goes in the except clause?

Practice Projects
For practice, write programs to do the following tasks.

The Collatz Sequence
Write a function named collatz() that has one parameter named number. If number is even, then collatz() should print number // 2 and return this value. If number is odd, then collatz() should print and return 3 * number + 1.

Then write a program that lets the user type in an integer and that keeps calling collatz() on that number until the function returns the value 1. (Amazingly enough, this sequence actually works for any integer—sooner or later, using this sequence, you’ll arrive at 1! Even mathematicians aren’t sure why. Your program is exploring what’s called the Collatz sequence, sometimes called “the simplest impossible math problem.”)

Remember to convert the return value from input() to an integer with the int() function; otherwise, it will be a string value.

Hint: An integer number is even if number % 2 == 0, and it’s odd if number % 2 == 1.

The output of this program could look something like this:

Enter number:
3
10
5
16
8
4
2
1

Input Validation
Add try and except statements to the previous project to detect whether the user types in a noninteger string. Normally, the int() function will raise a ValueError error if it is passed a noninteger string, as in int('puppy'). In the except clause, print a message to the user saying they must enter an integer.
